---
title: Life as Experiment - The Doomed City by the Brothers Strugatsky
description: Book thoughts
publicationDate: 2025-05-28
image: "./doomed-city.jpg"
imageAlt: Doomed City by Nicholas Roerich
---

The Brothers Strugatsky are the pre-eminent sci-fi authors of Russia. Unlike other literary masters of their era, such as Bulgakov and Grossman, they achieved great publishing success during Soviet times, despite the onerous demands of the government censors. However, their most political novel--_The Doomed City_--was written from 1969-1972 with the belief that it was too dangerous to ever leave the desk drawer.

The eponymous setting of the novel, known only as the City, is an unearthly place where all inhabitants are governed by an enormous Experiment. The goal of the Experiment is never stated, but it is the grounding principle of everything that happens, no matter how bizarre. Baboons invade, tearing through buildings, attacking people, and shitting in the streets. People disappear and turn up dead a few weeks later, their corpses smashed as if they fell from the sky. The sun goes out for twenty straight days. Whatever happens, whatever it is, it is a part of the Experiment. 

Our protagonist, Andrei, is an astronomer from 1950s Leningrad who is newly arrived in the City, and he believes wholeheartedly that a socialist utopia is imminent--as long as the people have the strength to obey the party leaders. At the novel's outset, he constantly exhorts his friends to carry out their duty without losing faith in the Experiment, from which we understand that his ideological tendencies have been transplanted onto the Experiment.

The City's other inhabitants have been plucked from various countries and times throughout the 20th Century. They range from an American professor of the 60’s to a recently decommissioned officer of the Wehrmacht; from a Chinese peasant of the 50’s to a Russian Soviet Jew. Their only commonality is agreeing to participate in the Experiment, the purpose of which is never explained.

This narrative structure begs the question of what it means to treat society--and more fundamentally, life itself--as an experiment. 

First of all, Andrei's character and his initial zeal makes it clear that the Strugatskys' viewed life under the Soviet as akin to an experiment. The Soviet leadership set conditions and tasks on their human test subjects, tormenting them for a higher purpose that remained invisible. These human test subjects were transformed into statistics, into numbers; their life had no further purpose and could be discarded at will. It was with this mindset that the Soviet leadership could abandon 3.5 million Leningraders to a Nazi siege for 900 days as nearly half the city perished of starvation.

But the Experiment represents a more general idea than a single regime, a single country. It  gives a form to the utter subjugation and destruction of individual will under totalitarian power. It describes existence without guarantee of lasting safety and stability, and no room for comfort or dreams. In this situation, there is no point in planning for the future because everything can be taken away in the blink of an eye. 

Without safety, without purpose, without hope, a human is made to feel like an animal. The Experiment is an experience of the world in which absurdity and suffering reach an incomprehensible level-–one that is fundamentally incompatible with the belief that human life has intrinsic value.

A key apparatus of this Experiment is a cruelly dysfunctional government bureaucracy. Whether in fiction or in reality, such government ensures there is no recourse for any of the test subjects as they are beaten, humiliated, and forced to betray each other.

Capturing this perspective of life under totalitarianism mattered deeply to the Strugatskys, so much so that they spent years of their lives writing an unpublishable book. A major part of their motivation was of course their critique of the socialist party. But it was also a deeply personal reflection of their own lives. As contemporary Russian sci-fi author Dmitri Glukhovsky argues in his foreword to the book, the City is real; it is Leningrad, the city of their youth. The infamous Siege of Leningrad is just one example of the horrors that Leningraders of their generation experienced.

The Strugatskys lived through this siege as children. They seem to channel their voices into the Andrei of their novel, as in a sudden outburst, he describes the famine through the eyes of a child:

> That was no Experiment… And that city was more terrible than this one. I would definitely have gone insane. What saved me was being so young. \[…\]
> 
> Some people just died quietly, some committed acts of heroism, and then they died too… Some slaved in a factory to the bitter end, and when the time came, they died too… Some grew fat on all this, buying valuables, gold, pearls, and earrings for scraps of bread, and then they died too–they took them down to the Neva and shot them \[…\] Some hunted with axes in the side streets and ate human flesh and even tried to trade in it, but they died too anyway… In that city nothing was more ordinary than death. But the authorities still functioned, and while the authorities functioned, the city stood.
> 
> I wonder, did they feel sorry for us at all? Or did they simply not think about us? Did they just carry out orders, and the orders were about the city, with nothing about us? That is, there was something about us, of course, but only under point “P for Population”…

Boris Strugatsky was eight when the siege began and lived in Leningrad throughout the three years with his mother; 17-year-old Arkady Strugatsky was evacuated from the city by train along with his father and was the sole survivor of the trip in his train car–his father died upon arrival at Vologda, over 300 miles away. The siege is only one example of the many “experiments” that the people of Leningrad and the Soviet Union were forced to undergo over the course of the years.

This atmosphere of absurdity, misery, and lack of agency is just one component of the Strugatskys’ notion of a societal experiment. The other, crucial part is ideological hope, which encourages citizen-subjects to actively participate in such experiments. 

At the beginning of the novel, Andrei believes that the Experiment has a noble purpose that everyone needs to cooperate to achieve, just as in the Soviet Union, throughout all of the economic hardship and political repression, the people were constantly promised that tomorrow would be nothing short of utopia, as Glukhovsky writes in his foreword:

> It turned out that we could get there simply by staying alive. In paradise, rationality and humanism would be triumphant. Everything there would be honest and just. In paradise, it was explained to us, absolutely everything would be free; society would take from each according to his abilities and give according to his needs.

For such a bright tomorrow, people were willing to accept much hardship and injustice. But the years blew by and paradise failed to arrive. Which leads to the crucial line of questioning that arises from a life lived under societal experiment: How does one make sense of a life lived in pursuit of such an ideal, just to learn that it had always been an illusion? That all of the suffering was pointless? How does one go on living?

Andrei embodies this world-shaking disillusionment as the story progresses. Despite his initial zealotry, by the end of the novel, he has lost all belief that there was any meaning to the Experiment. He describes the feeling:

> “I understand everything in the world now. \[…\] Nobody needs me, and nobody needs anyone. Whether I exist or I don’t, whether I fight the fight or kick back and lounge on the sofa–it makes no difference. Nothing can be changed, nothing can be put right. All I can do is find myself a more or less comfortable niche. Everything moves along on its own; I don’t make any difference.”
> 
> \[…\]
> 
> “The right time to live is when you don’t have any understanding!” Andrei said with quiet fury. “With this understanding the right thing to do is die! And if I weren’t such a coward, if the damned protoplasm didn’t scream so loud inside me, I’d know what to do. I’d choose a good, strong rope…”

Boris Strugatsky, in his afterword, describes this fundamental dilemma as the crux of the novel. In his words, Andrei’s story

> \[demonstrates\] how, under the circumstances of life, a young man’s worldview radically changes, how he shifts from the position of an unshakeable fanatic to the condition of a man suspended, as it were, in an airless ideological void, without even the slightest purchase for his feet… How to live in conditions of ideological vacuum? How and what for?

Andrei’s actions at the end of the novel are a physical reflection of this total loss of grounding. He is sent on a suicidal mission to find the north pole of the City’s world, together with Izya, his Soviet Russian Jewish friend. They spend weeks trudging through an interminable, unmapped desert; the artificial sun jumps about in the sky without any astronomical logic; ancient ruined huts and palaces with little water sources appear after days of walking through nothingness, then vanish behind them as the pair refuse to quit their mad search for the north pole. 

Their shoes fall to pieces, the sledge of supplies they drag with them fall to pieces, their beards grow long and their throats wither from dehydration. It’s an apocalyptic setting. And it’s arguably just like Andrei’s old life, but purged of all ideology: simply believing in an insane goal, despite all hardship and indication that it doesn’t exist.

However, Andrei’s companion, Izya, has a deeper motivation. Throughout the novel, he appears as a friendly, irreverent scholar with unclear motives, cheerfully chasing down books and manuscripts and for his research, persevering even as he is beaten and betrayed by other people of the City. The conclusion of this effort is a report on the history of civilization and the City, which he hopes to disseminate. And so, as he and Andrei trudge north, Izya buries copies of his report along their path, with a marker stone indicating their presence. The fate of these reports, whether they are discovered or sit untouched for all eternity, is not of concern to him. Eventually, Izya explains to Andrei his hope for the future: the “edifice of culture”.

> All the rest is just the scaffolding around the wall of the temple. All the best things that humankind has invented in a hundred thousand years, all the important things it has understood and achieved through the power of thought, go into that temple. Through all the millennia of its history, howling, starving, lapsing into slavery and rebelling, guzzling and copulating, humanity carries this temple along on the turbid crest of its wave, without even suspecting it. Sometimes it suddenly notices this temple on its back and stumbles \[…\] but humankind never really understands what it’s dealing with \[…\] the temple just carries on growing and growing from century to century, from millennium to millennium, and it’s impossible either to destroy it or to ultimately abase it.
> 
> The most amusing thing is that every little brick of this temple, every eternal book, every eternal melody, every unique architectural silhouette, bears within itself the compressed experience of this humankind, its thoughts and thoughts about it, ideas about the goals and contradictions of its existence; that no matter how separate it might seem from all the vital interests of this herd of swine, at the same time it is always inseparable from this herd and inconceivable without it…
> 
> And another amusing thing is that no one actually builds this temple consciously… It can’t be planned out in advance on paper or in the brain of some genius; it grows of its own accord, unerringly absorbing all the best that human history produces.

Izya believes in an abstract ideal of culture, in which the fragments of insight and beauty that emerge from the chaos of human society endure, even if ripped apart by other humans or lost to the vagaries of time. That they once were created by humans is testament enough to a higher good, and one that is actually worth believing in, because unlike squishy, corruptible things like political ideologies or human relationships, it is “impossible either to destroy \[…\] or ultimately abase”.

The traumatic history of the Russian literary tradition during Soviet times supplies important context for this belief in the intrinsic value of artistic creation. Many classic Russian-language books considered among the greatest works of the 20th century--such as the Soviet war hero reporter Vasily Grossman’s _Life and Fate_ and the famed Mikhail Bulgakov’s _Master and Margarita_--nearly vanished due to the Soviet Union’s harsh and arbitrary censorship. Indeed, both authors were pushed into near obscurity for minor deviations from the party line. A single copy of the former novel survived KGB raids and was smuggled out of the country on microfilm ten years after the author died; the only manuscript of the latter was thrown into the fireplace during a period of intense surveillance and later rewritten from memory.

This literary heritage establishes two crucial ideas underpinning the Strugatskys’ conception of the edifice of culture. The first is that simple human expression and the resulting cultural outputs are powerful enough to change history and topple the most trenchant regimes; otherwise, why would the Soviet party fear words on a page? The second is that since the small fraction of novels, poems, and songs that clung to existence during periods of censorship have a recognized cultural value, then surely the many hundreds of works that were snuffed out and forgotten mattered as well.

All well and good with this “edifice of culture,” but Andrei points out that this ideal has no place for him as another average person, and therefore he can find no solace in it. He is not a great thinker nor artist, and therefore lacks the ability to add to the temple. Nor is he like Izya, a born scholar who can “read twenty-four hours a day \[and\] actually remember everything too”–-someone who keeps the temple alive within their soul. Izya counters:

> And you’re a consumer… Don’t pull that face, you fool! That’s really great! After all, without a consumer, the temple wouldn’t have any human meaning. Just think how lucky you are, you blockhead! After all, it takes years and years of special processing, brainwashing, and supremely cunning systems of deception to provoke you, the consumer, into attempting to destroy the temple… […] Just think, you rattlebrain: the ones like you are an extremely small minority too! Give the majority the wink, give them permission, and off they’ll go, whooping and hollering to smash everything with crowbars, burn everything to the ground with blazing torches… that has already happened, many times over! And it will probably happen again, time after time… And you complain! But if it is possible at all to ask, what is the temple for? there can only be one answer: for you!
---

I find Boris Strugatsky's notion of an ideological vacuum useful for describing today's state of affairs. In the 2020's, it seems that the world has drifted in an ideological vacuum for decades, without even recognizing that things weren't always so. For the purpose of discussion going forward, when I say ideology, I refer simply to a belief in the possibility of a better world. No one seems to have a genuine, institutionalized hope for making the future a better place (there's the UN, but who listens to it anymore?). No one believes that humans are free to invent, to move on from yesterday and truly transform the world for the better. 

The lack of vision seems silly when weighed against the breadth of technological progress in the past century; humans have the machines, the agricultural prowess, the medicine, and overall, an unprecedented capability to bring this world closer to a paradise. But there is no ideological framework for it anywhere. And so consumerism, wealth concentration, ethnonationalism reign supreme. For a born and raised citizen of the ideological vacuum, the only things left are a desire to be as comfortable, cool, and beautiful as possible; to only trust the people that look like oneself (or think enough like it); and to humiliate anyone that gets in the way.

The idealist in me feels that something has gone awry if the guiding principles of today’s society are not much more than materialism and tribalism, with no will to re-imagine the world to address even basic problems in people’s lives–-even apolitical things that have obvious solutions, like the dramatic rise in social isolation.

Of course, pure idealism is naive, and the absence of utopian ideologies isn’t the root of all despair—-a crucial lesson of _The Doomed City_ is the disastrous results of utopian ideologies--the flagrant crimes excused in the name of a future paradise. Utopian ideologies are useful for totalitarian regimes; they provide a bright enough delusion that urges the masses on towards their own destruction. Perhaps it was a step forward for humanity to abandon all that. And, as Izya preaches, we should simply focus on memorializing the outputs of human culture.

Furthermore, just because a certain regime espouses a set of ideals doesn’t mean that human souls within the society actually change–-even if many people truly believe in those ideals, enough to die for them. As part of the introduction to the edifice of culture, Izya contemptuously states:

> the majority only believes it’s important because its goal is to stuff its belly and gratify its flesh with absolutely as little effort as possible […] The history of the majority has a beginning and an end. At the beginning the majority eats what it’s given. And at the end it spends its entire life trying to solve the problem of choice. What special, tasty sort of item can I choose to eat? Something I haven’t eaten before?

Of course, greed existed within the Soviet Union and corruption thrived, despite all the aspirations of "to each according to his needs". And Andrei himself exemplifies this throughout his arc before he is sent to the desert, as he evolves from a committed socialist devoted to the wellbeing of all people, to a hedonistic, top-ranking bureaucrat, with a woman to fuck at home and a woman to fuck in the office. Humanity has simple, banal, physical desires, as ancient as humans themselves.

---

Now, after all of this struggle to make sense of the book, I’ll say that I believe in the Strugatskys’ idea of an “edifice of culture”, with some addenda.

What _The Doomed City_ teaches is that one cannot trust ideology to transform human society into paradise. At the extreme of this reasoning, one cannot trust _anything_ to radically transform human society for the better. Because in order for society as a whole to transform, there must be a social glue that enforces a unified transformation of all people in that society, and the only force that has successfully bound the masses thus far is an authoritarian leadership combined with political/religious/ethnic ideology. It is not trustworthy equipment for leading society to a better place.

The Strugatskys harbor a deep pessimism about the outcomes of any kind of mass movement—-even one with the best possible intentions. Mass movements bring to the fore people who represent the extremist, totalitarian impulses within society, by nature of their ability to channel the emotions of the crowd, to emphasize any common enemies to further unite the crowd, to draw on ethnic and religious commonalities, and to serve as a figurehead by which the crowd can feel empowered. Typically, a mass movement requires an enemy in order to maintain this group coherence and feeling of empowerment, and the only way to sustain it is to continuously seek out or invent new enemies and inflict violence against them.

Despite the hopelessness of humanity from this perspective, the Strugatskys argue that there still remains a reason to go on living: the “edifice of culture”. Or, in more concrete terms, the belief that any cultural achievement, any great work that has been achieved by a human, is added to this transcendent construction and never truly dies. In this manner, the good that surfaces from all of the struggling and suffering of humanity can be skimmed away, like pearls from an oyster, and preserved. This ideal is divorced from society by the use of the word "edifice"; much more than other candidate words like “heritage” or “inheritance”, which would immediately invoke a sense of possession, an implied judgment of the worthiness of the individual. An edifice simply exists.

Furthermore, Izya asserts that the edifice of culture goes beyond religion, which begs the question of how it could be impervious to destruction. There are two potential answers: the resilience of human pursuit of that which is good, and the untraceability of the effects of every human action.

To expand on the first point: even as mass movements form–as armies rise, people turn on each other, kill, and burn everything to the ground–there do exist powerful instincts for good, for truth, and for beauty within humans, whose spark has never been put out despite all of the attempts to crush it. There is something ineffable that endures within humans, and so too, this edifice of culture must endure. 

And to the second point, it is impossible to say by what twists of fate a person’s work, or a person’s life, will or won’t end up impacting this world. There are clear-cut examples of someone’s work achieving massive cultural impact where no one expected it. Grossman died believing that no one would ever see his magnum opus; the same fate befell Van Gogh and many other artists that we laud as visionaries that changed the world today. But there are much more tangential ways that humans add to the edifice of culture. An anonymous peasant woman in the Russian countryside told Dostoyevsky a parable about an onion that struck him so deeply that he wrote it into a key moment of _The Brothers Karamazov._ Almost certainly, no one remembers her name now. And to wax poetic just a bit further, there are ways that people change the lives of others that can seem so coincidental as they happen. A few chance words from a stranger can change a person’s world, can save or end a person’s life. So, it’s impossible to say that something survives or is lost forever and never changes anything.

I would add this additional mechanism to the Strugatskys’ edifice of culture: in order for humans to truly partake in some way, there must exist at least a grain of optimism within their soul. There must exist a belief that it is worth it to articulate some idea, some vision such that it can be shared with other humans… I think this grain of optimism is the same one that leads people to believe that the world can be made a better place, and perhaps if the conditions are right, leads people to unite around this shared optimism, and eventually, to create and propagate an ideology such as communism. So, although the edifice of culture represents a new path for an individual that has fallen into an ideological vacuum-—a path that leads away from the trap of ideological mass movements, a path that doesn’t sell false visions of paradise at the price of a life of misery—-the impulse remains the same, this deeply human will towards hope.

And so, this hope endures, and it burns down the old world and builds a new one, the cycle continues, and humanity stumbles forward, carrying the edifice of culture on its back.

Two final thoughts on the topic:

1. In the contemporary world, there are powerful forces that are pushing humanity towards stasis and thoughtlessness. A rise in the global standard of living coincided with the rise of smartphones and social media, and these two combined can, in a powerful way, allow humans to continuously indulge their fundamental, biological desires for comfort–some special, tasty new item to eat, some new clothes to take many pictures in—as well as for recognition and some threshold of stimulation and interest. In some sense, social media is worse than alcohol in terms of its ability to suppress human thought and action. I don’t believe that the human instinct for culture and hope will come anywhere close to dying, but I think it could be quite effectively diminished and stifled, for a time.

2. The proposal of this edifice of culture seemingly originates from a point of despair with society and its ability to better itself. But it also seems to offer some cosmic sense of comfort, even for someone who is deeply unspiritual such as myself. At some point in the future, the last human in the universe will die, and along with them, so will every human memory of humanity. All of the bright, pretty things that humans made for themselves and each other will have lost any purpose for existence, and will crumble and disintegrate until not a trace remains. But if all of the accomplishments accumulated in the edifice of culture exist separate from humanity’s ability to destroy things, then one can argue that all of the thoughts and understandings that have accumulated since humans first began assembling culture, don’t require a human observer, or any observer at all for it to matter. They have value simply because they even existed at all. 

---

